RFC-004 Revising website licenses terms/page (#9)
thegooddocsproject/request-for-comment: RFC-004-revising-licenses-page.md

# RFC004 - Revising website licenses terms/page

## Proposed by

Ryan Macklin ([@macklin](https://thegooddocs.slack.com/team/U01DYRWG43X))
Initially submitted on 2021-07-13

## Current status

- [ ] Draft
- [x] Under discussion (until 2021-07-27, assuming two weeks post initial submission)
- [ ] Final comment and voting (until YYYY-MM-DD) {{Add date after selecting this status.}}
- [ ] Accepted
- [ ] Rejected
- [ ] Implemented
- [ ] Deferred
- [ ] Withdrawn

## Proposal overview

> I believe we should rethink the licensing terms for website content, as listed on [thegooddocsproject.dev/licenses/](https://thegooddocsproject.dev/licenses/). As they're currently written, they provision everything as [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) (a.ka. "CC BY 4.0), including all text, images, HTML code, and anything else.

Reviewer: I think it would help to list specifically want you want to protect. You've mentioned personal information in the past, such as personal photos. (I'd be open to excluding personal photos, which we could do in the back end by putting photos into a separately licensed repository, or maybe in a separately licensed directory.)
Is there any other personal information which is printed in blogs which we need to protect?
If the author is sharing blog material themselves, they are in control about what is shared under the CC-By license.

Author: I'm confused. Have I not listed that? If we're asking people to write bios and provide photos (or other image) for the purposes of the blog structure, we shouldn't say we need those to all be CC BY.

Reviewer: Acknowledged. I'll step back from my comment.

> We may not always have the rights to relicense what we put on our page, and not every contributor is comfortable with having their info and likeness released as publicly usable.

Reviewer: suggestion: For this RFC, let's split this into two ideas:
1. "We may not always have the rights to relicense what we put on our page."
The default open source position for addressing this challenge is that we enforce that incoming material must comply with the repository license. So I don't think this should be considered a blocking article.

2. "Not every contributor is comfortable with having their info and likeness released as publicly usable."
This is a more difficult problem, and I acknowledge your concern, while also acknowledging the challenge of introducing a solution which are supported by external tooling (such as search engines trawling multiple sites). Any custom solution we introduce will be painful for any future maintainers.
A few options:
A. Suggest contributors make use of a pen name or pseudonym.
B. Don't copy personal information into blog pages.
C. Don't copy personal information into the blog's source repository in git. (Hyperlink personal images such as headshots out to an externally repository under a different license.) That will allow us to apply a CC-By license to the entire blog repository, which makes it easy for github tools to assess and correctly advertise the license terms for the site.

Author: 1) There a large difference between use and relicense. Most OS projects have free-licensed code integrated with original code, which is a different paradigm than human content.

2) For me, none of those options solve the issue. i'm especially against A, because that should be someone's decision make for themselves, not because of the licensing options on a project they work on.

Reviewer 2: 2. Asking contributors to contribute under a pen name or anonymously is not a great solution. Many people contribute to blogs to raise their professional profiles. Many people who care about being able to control their images are minoritized in tech. This request puts them at a professional disadvantage.

I would vote for prioritizing inclusiveness for blog contributors over making life easier for hypothetical future maintainers.

Author: Between the tools that Bryan and I have worked out for the blog, and being able to have an internal document that makes the licensing text clear for our purposes as for which to use, I also see this as making life easy for us in the future as maintainers.

Reviewer: I acknowledge and agree with the arguments that we shouldn't compromise user needs (especially the option A). I'll step back from this comment.

### Scope

The scope of this is about the website's content. Licensing for our products (templates, doc tools, etc.) aren't part of this discussion, though this proposal does indicate where the primary home for those licenses should be.

## Motivation

> For the upcoming blog, not everything we release will be ours. If we use stock photos for the purposes of social media optimization, we won't have the rights to relicense that content. We also may not have the rights to relicense other content we'll reuse, including any HTML/CSS/scripting to generate the pages.

Reviewer: suggestion: For this RFC, I suggest we split to topic of personal information (and images) from supporting stock images, and scripts.
For a blog, the primary content should be author generated text (and maybe diagrams).
* There is a wide range of CC-By stock images which can be mined to fit with blog text, and I feel we can retain CC-By license integrity by applying a CC-By policy to supporting stock photos applied to the blog. 
* I'm expecting that any web infrastructure, and html scripts, will likely be provided and used under an open source license. Scripts will likely sit in another repository (or at least in its own directory) and will have associated license info there.

Author: Splitting the conversation is fine, but the final result shouldn't differentiate because qualitative conditions for the license makes the license unusable.

> On a personal level, I don't release my likeness to public use, and the current website license terms makes me wary of continuing with the project. I used to work in games (and still do at times), and I've had too many death threats (honestly, one such threat is too many) and have seen too many friends be impersonated to want to give bad actions a contractual right to use my likeness however they like. (Bad actors will still use likenesses, but at least they can't defend their actions by citing a license that allows them to use one's info.)

Reviewer: question: What is your position on videos?
If we are to follow open source standard practices, then I'd suggest that our video-blogs should be licensed under CC-By.
This would mean that someone could take a screenshot of a talking head CC-By video.
I'd suggest that if you don't want that to happen, then don't turn your camera on.

Reviewer: thought: Ryan, I'm very supportive of your goals to protect personal information (such as personal images). My goal is to help achieve this within existing licensing norms, which are well understood and hence are likely to be supported long term.

Author: I assume the videos are the same licensing as the blog posts. However, that doesn't mean that all blog contributors will be video contributors, and doesn't change the stauts/needs around any "about" content on the site.

Reviewer 3: Comment (supportive of Ryan's original text): Ryan, thank you for adding this personal note to provide some context for the stakes involved in these licensing decisions. I **strongly** want to ensure that our blog contributors feel safe to freely contribute to our blog knowing that our blog's choice of license provides some legal protection for their personal likeness and prevents its misappropriation by bad actors.

I don't think we need to present our contributors with a false choice: either contribute openly at your own risk or contribute anonymously. Anonymity should not be the only recourse for protecting one's personal online identity. Ryan's proposed solution offers a third choice that is reasonable, simple, and straightforward: we have a different license for our blog than the license we use for our templates. People can feel free to contribute to our blog using their actual name and likeness and they can still have the peace of mind that they have some legal protection. It isn't either/or.

Reviewer: Thanks for the responses. I'm satisfied and agree with the answers.

### Blocking

[RFC002 (Procope/blog & video)](https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/request-for-comment/pull/3) is blocked by this proposal.

## Proposal

I'd like to shift the burden of licensing to the individual elements, rather than have a pure blanket. That means:

> - Our products (templates, doc tools, etc) have the BSD0 license in their readme or license text files, and not rely on the license website page for that notice

Reviewer: praise: I'm supportive of licenses being applied on a per-repository basis, in line with standard open source practices. We can then revise wording in thegooddocsproject.dev/licenses/ to be a summary of license terms within our repositories, where {repository}/LICENSE.txt is referred to as the point of truth.
This can be framed as:
"As defined in each repository's LICENSE.txt file, ... {provide summary}"
thought: I wouldn't want to introduce any special case which deviate from the repository license file as I feel this is going to become too complicated to manage and consequently will be broken (due to ignorance. indifference, laziness, annoyance or possibly even spite due to frustration due to the extra red tape required).

Author: 100%. Though that's a decision to be handled by the template sub-orgs, it seems like we'd have an interal (don't pardon the pseudo-pun) *template* for our license file. That could be nearly all the same text for the license, perhaps with particular license acknowledgments at the end as needed. (Again, for the template sub-orgs to figure out.)

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification. Happy to close this out.

- For blog posts etc, post pages would default to have "`This blog post's original text is (c) [year] [author name], and licensed under CC BY 4.0`". Currently, the blog is set up to allow for this default, with other changes allowed. Ryan and Bryan worked together to make sure this could be modular.

> - "Original text" covers not opening any quoted text (like in referencing a book's text) as being CC, and doesn't open any stock images from being CC. If a custom image is created by the author, we can add that to the CC license, which is part of why Ryan and Bryan worked to make the license field modular.

Reviewer: issue (blocking): I'm concerned that this definition is getting too complicated. It is not a standard license term so we don't get the benefit of many lawyers having had reviewed it. It also means that we now force stakeholders to read the license terms. (One of the beauties of open source licenses is that you only need to read them once - not for every single project you get involved in.)
On first brush, I don't fully understand what it means, and I've read a lot of licenses and I care about what is written. A quick test is: Ask your employer's legal department if they have time to review this license for you. Ask if they would agree to the license terms, or whether they say "just use one of the standard open source licenses" (which is the usual response).

Author: How is it not a standard license term? It's a declaration of open content + license stated. Please show me what you mean by "non-standard"? That the declaration is more specific than "everything"?

Author: We can simplify the default blog license to "This blog post's text is..." And allow for a variant for "This blog post's text (aside from quoted text) is..."

That *slightly* complicates this, but if that makes the default license readable, and we have an easy way to set variants (which we currently do based on the work Bryan and I have already done), I'm more than fine with it.

Reviewer 3: Comment (hopefully clarifying Ryan's previous comments): I also don't understand the nature of your objection, Cameron. Ryan is merely clarifying what "original text" refers to, as he explains in more detail in the section entitled "Some clarity" a few headings below this one in the RFC. As he states in that section:

> Note that you can specify with CC BY what content is covered under the license. It isn't inherent to the license that everything in a work is covered. You always say what's covered...

So all he's doing is following CC BY's standard and specifying what is covered in this context: the original text. That's the standard application of CC BY.

Reviewer: I'll re-categorize my comment to:
thought (non-blocking): I have a mild feeling that this explanation is a bit long and legal, which could be annoying to a reader. (As is the case with almost all legal text.)
I'm fine with stepping back from my comment and deferring to advice from Ryan and Alyssa.

Author: I'll resolve this as a non-issue. These aren't for readers, they're for people explicitly duplicating and republishing our content elsewhere. Because (to restate in yet more words) most people "using" a blog are reading it, putting it in their minds, executing on whatever thoughts they get from it, and perhaps share it around. Rare is the instance where someone's use is about _copying_ and _republishing_ the content—and those people absolutely shouldn't be "annoyed" by legal text, or they're in the wrong line of work.

(This is also why Google's guidelines for publications is different from its open source patching guide.)

> - For everything else, we leave the material either unlicensed or under whatever licenses already exist for that material. (See What's currently CC BY content below.)

Reviewer: suggestion (blocking): I'm concerned about us supporting unlicensed or non-open licensed material. This makes it hard for downstream users to re-purpose content on our site (which is counter to the principles of open source). We should make it easy for downstream users to build upon ideas on our site, which we do by making our licenses open, clear, and simple to use.
I expect the majority of our contributors will support this.
The deal you make with open source is:
* You get the benefits of open source created before you.
* You get the marking pipeline provided by a successful open source project.
* Your content can then be used for free by others, which reduces any proprietary lock in you can provide (to say write a book and prevent others from using your ideas.)

Author: I don't see how this isn't handling that. Admittedly, I also don't see why we need CC BY for this content except to allow those of us at Google to freely submit to this. Using the Write the Docs model, the information is freely released without a CC BY model, because the intent of the information is to be repurposes through thought, not copy-paste. Thus, downstream users are able to bulid upon the ideas on our site.

But since contributors are releasing the info as CC BY, we're being even more permissive than that--not less--by allowing literal replication.

Author: I'm trying to be forward-thinking here by allowing us to quote some non-open text to build on it. Or to even quote text in general without having to research the potential licensing just to make a blog post framed around building on communal knowledge—like responding/adding to something mentioned in a WTD talk.

Reviewer 3: Comment (agreeing with Ryan): I also don't understand the nature of the objection you're making Cameron. The ideas are publicly accessible and quotable. People can build on those ideas and remix them to make even better ideas. CC BY is a pretty open license type. The only requirement is that people need to give proper attribution to a blog when it informs their thinking, when they quote it, or when they are inspired by it. I think that's a generally ethical practice anyhow: give credit to the people who came up with a good idea that you like.

Reviewer: Thanks for the considered response. I'll recategorize my comment to:
thought (non-blocking): I'm considering we might want to use:
We leave the material under whatever licenses already exists, or if unspecified, it we default to the CC-By.

My thinking is derived from what I suggest are norms. Refer to github terms: https://docs.github.com/en/github/site-policy/github-terms-of-service#6-contributions-under-repository-license

### 6. Contributions Under Repository License
Whenever you add Content to a repository containing notice of a license, you license that Content under the same terms, and you agree that you have the right to license that Content under those terms. If you have a separate agreement to license that Content under different terms, such as a contributor license agreement, that agreement will supersede.

Isn't this just how it works already? Yep. This is widely accepted as the norm in the open-source community; it's commonly referred to by the shorthand "inbound=outbound". We're just making it explicit.

Author: If unspecified, we'll leave unspecified. If someone didn't specify it and we're still using it for some reason, we are not going to decide for them it's CC BY. Deciding the license terms for someone else's content is a hard blocker.

Author: Added the consolidated version of this to feedback section for posterity

Since the licenses page wouldn't be the declaration of broad license anymore, it would become the page that explains what licences are used: BSD0 for our products, CC BY for "various pages" on the site. The licenses page wouldn't be the *primary authority* for this information, but instead a *single page to set expectations* for contributors and consumers regarding using elements of this project.

### Keeping it simple

Cameron mentioned wanting to keep this scheme simple. Here's how we keep to minimal labor:

- There are defaults, and we assume them. I've proposed those defaults above.
- For the generated content (like blog posts), the generator adds the license text. No need to sweat it.
- For products, they should already have licenses as part of the pages, because once downloaded or forked the license needs to be attached rather than disconnected on an external site

> - Having the license attached to the website content means readers see the license alongside the text, and don't have to wonder or ask or hunt around for licensing info

Reviewer 2: praise: I think having the license easily findable on each post is a great improvement!

Reviewer: praise: +1

## Links

* [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
* [Good Docs Project licenses page](https://thegooddocsproject.dev/licenses/)
* [Current RFC002 file, with prior discussions about licenses](https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/request-for-comment/pull/3)

## Feedback

{{Reviewer name}}:
- {{I suggest that ...}}
    - {{Community member name}}: {{Additional comment on same topic.}}
    - {{Proposer name}}: {{Addressed by ... / Ignored because ... / ...}}

## Implementation checklist

If this proposal is accepted, the following tasks must be completed:

- [ ] Revise license page on website
- [ ] Have documented our license info, procedures, assumptions, whatever we need to have documented as an org to make all of this known to all contributors
- [ ] Merge and deploy license page revisions
- [ ] Ensure any relevant site pages or documents has their license terms in them, and not relying on the site's license page

> - [ ] Define and address site repos' stucture needs and code/internal licencing needs based on content licensing

Author: Added this element, to make sure we cover whatever technological implications of this RFC

## Motivation

For the upcoming blog, not everything we release will be ours. If we use stock photos for the purposes of social media optimization, we won't have the rights to relicense that content. We also may not have the rights to relicense other content we'll reuse, including any HTML/CSS/scripting to generate the pages.

On a personal level, I don't release my likeness to public use, and the current website license terms makes me wary of continuing with the project. I used to work in games (and still do at times), and I've had too many death threats (honestly, one such threat is too many) and have seen too many friends be impersonated to want to give bad actions a contractual right to use my likeness however they like. (Bad actors will still use likenesses, but at least they can't defend their actions by citing a license that allows them to use one's info.)

### Blocking

[RFC002 (Procope/blog & video)](https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/request-for-comment/pull/3) is blocked by this proposal.

## Proposal

I'd like to shift the burden of licensing to the individual elements, rather than have a pure blanket. That means:

> - Our products (templates, doc tools, etc) have the BSD0 license in their readme or license text files, and not rely on the license website page for that notice. This concept covers all **replicated content**—anything we build that's meant to be copied, redistribted, and modified as part of execution.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Our products (templates, doc tools, etc) have the Apache 2.0 license in their readme or license text files, and not rely on the license website page for that notice. This concept covers all **replicated content**—anything we build that's meant to be copied, redistribted, and modified as part of execution.
```

Reviewer 2: Was there a discussion of this elsewhere that I missed?

Author: Checking in on this. Since this RFC is about the website content, I'll edit to be non-specific here with references.

Author: Edited to be non-specific re software license

- **Cognitive content** is content meant for people to read, internalize, and add to their sense of knowledge and practices without necessarily being about copying and republishing. Blog posts, white papers, videos, podcasts, posters, diagrams, all of that is "human content." Execution for this is about shaping thought patterns and discourse.
- For the above example: "Original text" covers not opening any quoted text (like in referencing a book's text) as being CC, and doesn't open any stock images from being CC. If a custom image is created by the author, we can add that to the CC license, which is part of why Ryan and Bryan worked to make the license field in the blog subproject modular.
- For everything else on the website, we leave the material either unlicensed, under whatever licenses already exist for that material, or make some other decision as part as a subproject's RFC. Thus, our default state is to not specify a license. (See What's currently CC BY content below.) It's better to not specific a license initally and add one later, than it is to specify the *wrong* license or inccorect details at any point.

> Since the licenses page wouldn't be the declaration of broad license anymore, it would become the page that explains what licences are used: BSD0 for our products, CC BY for "various pages" on the site. The licenses page wouldn't be the *primary authority* for this information, but instead a *single page to set expectations* for contributors and consumers regarding using elements of this project.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since the licenses page wouldn't be the declaration of broad license anymore, it would become the page that explains what licences are used: Apache 2.0 for our products, CC BY 4.0 for "various pages" on the site. The licenses page wouldn't be the *primary authority* for this information, but instead a *single page to set expectations* for contributors and consumers regarding using elements of this project.
```

> *Individual project's RFCs would define what sort of license scheme it has: BSD0 for replicated content, CC BY, or none. And it would include how/where it would include licensing info. This RFC is just about building that framework and disambiguating this issue.*

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*Individual project's RFCs would define what sort of license scheme it has: Apache 2.0 for replicated content, CC BY, or none. And it would include how/where it would include licensing info. This RFC is just about building that framework and disambiguating this issue.*
```

By changing the licenses page, we aren't "undoing" any license terms for the content at the moment. What we're doing instead is saying all changes going forward on the site are under the new terms (including not released at all in some cases).

If someone goes to a version of the site with the current license page (via github, archive.org, etc.), all of that material is still CC BY 4.0. We don't need to spell this out on the license page, but if someone inquires that's the answer.

## Open questions

* Is there an license that content files inherent by virtue of being in our repo? (Such as markdown files for the blog.) If so, this may pose a problem for us that we'll either need to account for or resolve.

## Links

* [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
* [Good Docs Project licenses page](https://thegooddocsproject.dev/licenses/)
* [Current RFC002 file, with prior discussions about licenses](https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/request-for-comment/pull/3)

## Feedback

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Bryan Klein:
- I suggest that we increase the specificity of the license terms in the LICENSE.md file and on the License page of the website.  Where we identify folders within the project that the content and byproducts of which the build process creates as `CC BY 4.0` and all other files in the repository are Apache 2.0 unless otherwise specified in the source file.  We can identify any number of files and folders as needed.  For example: `/content`, `/data', `/static/images`, etc.
    - {{Community member name}}: {{Additional comment on same topic.}}
    - {{Proposer name}}: {{Addressed by ... / Ignored because ... / ...}}
    
```

- **Cognitive content** is content meant for people to read, internalize, and add to their sense of knowledge and practices without necessarily being about copying and republishing. Blog posts, white papers, videos, podcasts, posters, diagrams, all of that is "human content." Execution for this is about shaping thought patterns and discourse.
- For the above example: "Original text" covers not opening any quoted text (like in referencing a book's text) as being CC, and doesn't open any stock images from being CC. If a custom image is created by the author, we can add that to the CC license, which is part of why Ryan and Bryan worked to make the license field in the blog subproject modular.
- For everything else on the website, we leave the material either unlicensed, under whatever licenses already exist for that material, or make some other decision as part as a subproject's RFC. Thus, our default state is to not specify a license. (See What's currently CC BY content below.) It's better to not specific a license initally and add one later, than it is to specify the *wrong* license or inccorect details at any point.

> Since the licenses page wouldn't be the declaration of broad license anymore, it would become the page that explains what licences are used: our specified software license our products, CC BY for "various pages" on the site. The licenses page wouldn't be the *primary authority* for this information, but instead a *single page to set expectations* for contributors and consumers regarding using elements of this project.

Reviewer 5: [non-blocking]

software license **for** our products

If someone goes to a version of the site with the current license page (via github, archive.org, etc.), all of that material is still CC BY 4.0. We don't need to spell this out on the license page, but if someone inquires that's the answer.

## Open questions

> * Is there an license that content files inherent by virtue of being in our repo? (Such as markdown files for the blog.) If so, this may pose a problem for us that we'll either need to account for or resolve.

Author: @bwklein Here's an open question for you regarding the current repo setup

Reviewer 4: The license as defined in LICENSE.md in the root of the project would be the terms of use for the repo.  But we can be more specific in that file and specify the licensing for files and byproducts of them in different folders of the site. Similar to this example from another project. https://gitlab.com/Nowaker/nowaker-blog/blob/master/LICENSE.md

Author: Thanks! Added to section
